समनुस्मृततावकाङ्घ्रियुग्म:
स मनु: पङ्कजसम्भवाङ्गजन्मा ।
निजमन्तरमन्तरायहीनं
चरितं ते कथयन् सुखं निनाय ॥१॥
समनुस्मृत-तावक-अङ्घ्रि-युग्म:	meditating properly on Thy pair of lotus feet
स: मनु:	that Manu (Swayambhuva)
पङ्कजसम्भव-अङ्ग-जन्मा	the son of Brahmaa
निजम्-अन्तरम्-	his own Manvantara
अन्तराय-हीनम्	free from all hindrances
चरितम् ते कथयन्	recounting Thy glories
सुखं निनाय	passed peacefully
That Swayambhuva Manu, the son of Brahmaa, spent his own Manvantara peacefully, free from all hindrances, meditating on Thy pair of lotus feet and recounting Thy glories.
समये खलु तत्र कर्दमाख्यो
द्रुहिणच्छायभवस्तदीयवाचा ।
धृतसर्गरसो निसर्गरम्यं
भगवंस्त्वामयुतं समा: सिषेवे ॥२॥
समये खलु तत्र	at that very time
कर्दम-आख्य:	(the Prajaapati) named Kardama
द्रुहिण-च्छाय-भव:-	born from the shadow of Brahmaa
तदीय-वाचा	following his (Brahmaa's) words
धृत-सर्ग-रस:	keenly interested in creation
निसर्ग-रम्यं भगवन्-त्वाम्-	O Lord! Who are naturally charming
अयुतम् समा:	for ten thousand years
सिषेवे	worshipped (Thee)
During that time the Prajaapati named Kardama who was born from the shadow of Brahmaa, following his (Brahmaa's) words became keenly interested in creation. He worshipped Thee who are naturally charming, for ten thousand years.
गरुडोपरि कालमेघक्रमं
विलसत्केलिसरोजपाणिपद्मम् ।
हसितोल्लसिताननं विभो त्वं
वपुराविष्कुरुषे स्म कर्दमाय ॥३॥
गरुड-उपरि	on Garuda
काल-मेघ-क्रमम्	as beautiful as a dark rain-bearing cloud
विलसत्-केलि-सरोज-पाणि-पद्मम्	holding in Thy hand a lustrous lotus
हसित-उल्लासित-आननम्	(with Thy) face lit up with a smile
विभो त्वं	O Lord! Thou
वपु:-आविष्कुरुषे स्म	(Thy) form did manifest
कर्दमाय	for Kardama
O Lord! Thou manifested Thy form for Kardama, sitting on Garuda, as beautiful as a dark rain-bearing cloud, holding a lustrous lotus in Thy hand, with your face lit up with a smile.
स्तुवते पुलकावृताय तस्मै
मनुपुत्रीं दयितां नवापि पुत्री: ।
कपिलं च सुतं स्वमेव पश्चात्
स्वगतिं चाप्यनुगृह्य निर्गतोऽभू: ॥४॥
स्तुवते पुलक-आवृताय तस्मै	with horripilation over his body, who was praising (Thee) to him
मनुपुत्रीम्	the daughter of Manu (Devahooti)
दयिताम्	as wife
नव-अपि पुत्री:	also nine daughters
कपिलं च सुतम्	and Kapil as son
स्वम्-एव पश्चात्	Thyself finally
स्वगतिं च-अपि-अनुगृह्य	and union with Thee also conferring
निर्गत:-अभू:	Thou disappeared
Kardama was praising Thee thrilled with devotion. Thou blessed that he would have Manu's daughter Devahooti as wife. Thou also blessed that he would have nine daughters, that Thou Thyself will be born as his son Kapil and also that he (Kadarma) would finally attain union with Thee.
स मनु: शतरूपया महिष्या
गुणवत्या सुतया च देवहूत्या ।
भवदीरितनारदोपदिष्ट:
समगात् कर्दममागतिप्रतीक्षम् ॥५॥
स: मनु:	that Manu
शतरूपया महिष्या	(along with) queen Shatarupaa
गुणवत्या सुतया देवहूत्या च	and the virtuous daughter Devahooti
भवत्-ईरित-नारद-उपदिष्ट:	advised by Naarada who was prompted by Thee
समगात् कर्दमम्-	approached Kardama
आगति-प्रतीक्षं	(who was) awaiting (their) arrival
Manu along with his queen wife Shatarupa and the virtuous daughter Devahooti, as advised by Naarada who was prompted by Thee, approached Kardama who was awaiting their arrival.
मनुनोपहृतां च देवहूतिं
तरुणीरत्नमवाप्य कर्दमोऽसौ ।
भवदर्चननिवृतोऽपि तस्यां
दृढशुश्रूषणया दधौ प्रसादम् ॥६॥
मनुना-उपहृताम् च	and given respectfully by Manu
देवहूतिं तरुणी-रत्नम्-	Devahooti, a jewel among damsels
अवाप्य कर्दम:-असौ	having got, that Kardama
भवत्-अर्चन-निर्वृत:-अपि	though content with worshipping Thee,
तस्यां दृढ-शुश्रूषणया	by her dedicated service
दधौ प्रसादम्	(was) pleased with her
Devahooti who was a gem among women was respectfully given by Manu to Kardama. Kardama, though solely delighted in worshipping Thee, was pleased with her by her dedicated service to him.
स पुनस्त्वदुपासनप्रभावा-
द्दयिताकामकृते कृते विमाने ।
वनिताकुलसङ्कुलो नवात्मा
व्यहरद्देवपथेषु देवहूत्या ॥७॥
स: पुन;-	he (Kardama)
त्वत्-उपासन-प्रभावात्-	because of the glory of Thy worship
दयिता-काम-कृते	for fulfilling the desires of his loving wife
कृते विमाने	in the aerial vehicle which was made
वनिता-कुल-सङ्कुल:	full of female attendants
नव-आत्मा	taking on a new body
व्यहरत्-देवपथेषु	sported in the garden of the gods
देवहूत्या	(with) Devahooti
Thereafter Kardama by the glory of worshipping Thee, to fulfill the desires of his loving wife, took on a new body, got an aerial vehicle made, which was full of female attendants, and sported in the garden of the gods along with Devahooti.
शतवर्षमथ व्यतीत्य सोऽयं
नव कन्या: समवाप्य धन्यरूपा: ।
वनयानसमुद्यतोऽपि कान्ता-
हितकृत्त्वज्जननोत्सुको न्यवात्सीत् ॥८॥
शत-वर्षम्-अथ व्यतीत्य	then after spending a hundred years
स:-अयम्	that this (Kardama)
नव कन्या: समवाप्य	nine daughters begetting
धन्य-रूपा:	who were very beautiful
वन-यान-समुद्यत:-अपि	though preparing to go to the forest
कान्ता-हित-कृत्-	wishing to fulfill the desire of his wife (and)
त्वत्-जनन-उत्सुक:	eager for Thy birth (as his son)
न्यवात्सीत्	stayed on (at home)
After spending a hundred years thus and begetting nine very beautiful daughters, Kardama wanted to take up the ascetic life and retire to the forest. Yielding to his wife's wishes and eagerly awaiting Thy birth as their son, he continued to stay on at home.
निजभर्तृगिरा भवन्निषेवा-
निरतायामथ देव देवहूत्याम् ।
कपिलस्त्वमजायथा जनानां
प्रथयिष्यन् परमात्मतत्त्वविद्याम् ॥९॥
निज-भर्तृ-गिरा	at the words of her husband
भवत्-निषेवा-निरतायाम्-	who was ever intent on Thy worship
अथ देव	then, O Lord!
देवहूत्याम्	to Devahooti
कपिल-त्वम्-अजायथा	as Kapil Thou were born
जनानाम्	amongst the people
प्रथयिष्यन्	to proclaim
परम-आत्म-तत्व-विद्याम्	the knowledge of the truth of the Supreme Being
O Lord! To Devahooti who, on the advise of her husband was ever engaged in worshipping Thee, Thou were born as Kapil in order to teach mankind the means for the attainment of the Supreme Reality.
वनमेयुषि कर्दमे प्रसन्ने
मतसर्वस्वमुपादिशन् जनन्यै ।
कपिलात्मक वायुमन्दिरेश
त्वरितं त्वं परिपाहि मां गदौघात् ॥१०॥
वनम्-एयुषि कर्दमे प्रसन्ने	when Kardama left for the forest happily
मत-सर्वस्वम्-	the entire philosophy (of Thine)
उपादिशन् जनन्यै	(Thou) imparted to (Thy) mother
कपिल-आत्मक	O Thou incarnate as Kapil!
वायु-मन्दिर-ईश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
त्वरितम्	hastily
त्वं परिपाहि	Thou relieve
माम् गद-औघात्	me from my many miseries
O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who were incarnate as Kapil, when Kardama left for the forest with a sense of fulfillment, Thou imparted the whole of Thy philosophy to Thy mother. Deign to hastily save me from my many ailments.